Jep submission (#1)
lemeurherve/jep: jep/0000/README.adoc

//
//
// Uncomment if this JEP depends on one or more other JEPs.
//| Requires
//| :bulb: JEP-NUMBER, JEP-NUMBER... :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment and fill if this JEP is rendered obsolete by a later JEP
//| Superseded-By
//| :bulb: JEP-NUMBER :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment when this JEP status is set to Accepted, Rejected or Withdrawn.
//| Resolution
//| :bulb: Link to relevant post in the jenkinsci-dev@ mailing list archives :bulb:

|===

== Abstract

// [TIP]
// ====
// Give a short (200 word) description of the technical issue addressed.

// * Use present tense - describe what the proposal "does" (as if it were already done), not what it will do.
// * Do not go into technical details and instead put those in the Specification section.
// * Do not talk about history or why this needs to be done. Instead, add the history to the Motivation section.
// ====

updates.jenkins.io serves the JSON of the update center used by Jenkins instances all around the world to know what plugins are available for installation and which is their last version.

This corresponds to around 10Tio of data served every month, representing one of the largest Jenkins infrastructure cost centers.

> This document describes how we can serve this content from R2 CloudFlare buckets (S3-like object storage) instead of a VM on AWS to greatly reduce infrastructure costs and improve our quality of service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how we can serve this content from a Mirrorbit geographically redirected download to some R2 CloudFlare buckets (S3-like object storage) for exemple,  instead of a VM on AWS to greatly reduce infrastructure costs and improve our quality of service as it would be geo-localized.
```

== Motivation

// [TIP]
// ====
// Explain why the existing code base or process is inadequate to address the problem that the JEP solves.
// This section may also contain any historical context such as how things were done before this proposal.

// * Provide a clear description of the high-level problem you are trying to solve.
// * The problem statement should be written in terms of a specific symptom that affects users, contributors, or the project as a whole.
// * The problem statement should not be written in terms of the solution.
// * Do not discuss design choices or alternative designs that were rejected - those belong in the Reasoning section.
// ====

The service is currently hosted in a VM on AWS, alongside pkg.origin.jenkins.io (TODO: explain it better).

> This service is not behind a Content Delivery Network as it needs to be updated regularly, but serving these JSON files from a VM causes a lot of outbound data transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This service cannot be behind a Content Delivery Network as it needs to be updated regularly without update discrepancy, but serving these JSON files from a VM causes a lot of outbound data transfer.
```

While the weight of these file is less than 3Mio, we estimate that around 300Gio of data are sent daily, 10Tio monthly.

As AWS outbound bandwith is not cheap, this represents around a third/quarter (TODO: be more precise/check proportions) of Jenkins infrastructure monthly total costs.

> Additional motivation, the VM hosting this service is also hosting pkg.origin.jenkins.io (TODO: develop? corresponding service instead?), separating these services would help their maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional motivation, the VM hosting this service is also hosting pkg.origin.jenkins.io (TODO: develop? corresponding service instead?), separating these services would help their maintenance, having a geo-localized delivery will greatly improve our users experience.
```

  * Block storage: close to archives.jenkins.io
  * Risk: Oracle sponsoring program is only 1 year, and is not easily secured for payment as other accounts

* Azure:
  * Easily in AKS: easier management as we've already have a good part of the infrastructure already there
  * Safer paiment process
  * Risk: cost of outbound to be evaluated

=== Fastly

Fastly (a CDN provider sponsoring Jenkins project and used to cache our websites) has been mentioned as a potential alternative to serve this content, but there were concerns about uncaching challenge (time and steps), and the fact that it would exceed Fastly sponsorship program resources.

=== R2 CloudFlare bucket

R2 Buckets is a object storage service like AWS S3 proposed by CloudFlare, a CDN provider.

The selling point of this solution is that there is no outbound bandwith cost, and their pricing per operation is more than reasonable. ($4.5 per million requests cf https://developers.cloudflare.com/r2/pricing/)

Another advantage of CloudFlare is that they propose their services in China, which would greatly improve our SLA for our asian users.

=== Mirroring mechanism

> (TODO: introduce and explain choice of mirrorbits)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We already use Mirrorbits for mirror.jenkins.io, and it allow us to keep the redirection within our hand (vs a CDN). The process it to have all the request input served by the mirrorbits process that will generate a redirection to the proper "mirror".  So the download part, usage of bandwitdh, will be take over by the mirror (R2 CloudFlare for now).
   And we still keep the synchronisation process to the mirrors in our hand, meaning that, as long as a file is not written on all mirrors, it's redirection is not updated (no 404 or wrong version)
```
